first pass writing up meta feeds + groups (#1)
ssbc/ssb-meta-feed-group-spec: README.md

> We also need to consider how to ensure our group data is replicated _enough_ - e.g. if a group is just me and my sister, then are there gonna be enough copies of the group data to be resilent/ timely.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also need to consider how to ensure our group data is replicated _enough_. For example, if a group is just me and my sister, then are there gonna be enough copies of the group data? If there are too few copies of the data, there's little or no gossip propagation, and can only get updates from my sister when we are directly connected.
```

## Principles

> 1. **group membership should be opaque**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Group membership should be opaque**
```

>    - you shouldn't be able to guess who is in a group using public info

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - You shouldn't be able to guess who is in a group using public info, such as:
```

>      - shards people are using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Shard feeds
```

>      - groupId (e.g. %a2148bs2K3klmhnaALsdaN90=.cloaked)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - `groupId` as a "cloaked message ID"
```

> 2. **we support sympathetic replication**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Peers should replicate sympathetically**
  - If a friend has a subfeed dedicated to a group, but I don't belong to that group, it is RECOMMENDED that I replicate that subfeed
  - May be randomized or subject to sympathy-related parameters
```

## Spec

This work builds on the [ssb-meta-feeds-spec] (v1).

We define two types of feeds that each peer will have:

> 1. <div class='group-invite'></div> the group-invite feed

Author: I don't like the name "group invite" (the lobby feed), happy to change

Reviewer: Just `invitations`?

Reviewer: We could drop these `<div>` since they don't render in GitHub

2. <div class='group'></div>        group feeds

```mermaid
graph TB

root(root)
v1(v1)
5(5) & b(b) & f(f)
group-invite(group-invite):::groupInvite

> denmark(denmark):::group

Reviewer: ```suggestion
aalborg(aalborg):::group
```

helsinki(helsinki):::group
wellington(wellington):::group

root --> v1 --> 5 --> helsinki
         v1 --> b --> group-invite

>          v1 --> f --> denmark

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         v1 --> f --> aalborg
```

It's fair to keep the pattern of cities, not countries. :)

                f --> wellington

classDef default stroke:none;
classDef groupInvite fill: #BF2669, stroke:none, color:white;
classDef group fill: #702A8C, stroke: none, color:white;
```
_Diagram showing an example layout of group-related feeds. Note that the shards in your
use-case will likely not be those shown, see how they are determined below._

> ### the group-invite feed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### The invitations feed
```

This feed holds messages which help peers join groups (e.g. `group/registration`, `group/add-member` messages).
This feed MUST be unique for each peer (a singleton).

> Each peer MUST replicate this feed from each of their peers (OR each peer they might possibly enter a group with).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each peer A who replicates the root metafeed of another B SHOULD also replicate B's invitation feed. 
```

I'm not sure if I understood what you were trying to say, so I wrote it like this instead. Let me know what you think

> For each peer, this feed MUST be located on the meta-feed tree at:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The invitations feed MUST be a direct subfeed of a shard feed, where the shard is derived using the string `"invitations"`. The invitations feed MUST be declared on the shard feed with `feedpurpose` equal to `"invitations"`.
```

I think we can delete the `/v1/:shard` stuff. It's neat, but it has a risk of nerd sniping us.

```
/v1/:shard/group-invite
```
Where:
- `:shard` is the shard feed derived using the string `"group-invite"`
- `group-invite` is a content feed with
    - `feedpurpose = "group-invite"`
    - `feedtype = ?` :warning:

See [ssb-meta-feeds-spec] for detail about the `v1` shared and the `shard` calculation.

All content on this feed SHOULD be encrypted with box2 encryption.

> ### group feeds

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Group feeds
```

> Group feeds MUST be located on the meta-feed tree at:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each group feeds MUST be a direct subfeed of a shard feed, where the shard is derived using the `groupKey` encoded in BFE. A group feed MUST be declared on the shard feed with `feedpurpose` equal to the `groupKey` encoded as an SSB URI string.
```

What is this SSB URI? How does it look like? We currently don't have SSB URIs for group keys. Note: we don't even have SSB URIs for groupIds. Also, we don't have BFE for group keys.

```

> /v1/:shard/:groupKey

Author: needed a concise way to talk about a tree-path to a meta-feed. This feels like it _almost_ works... but yeah, dunno

Reviewer: For now, instead of inventing a DSL language for this, let's just explain it in text with the MUSTs and SHOULDs. You can then include a diagram to clarify, as long as the diagram *is not the* spec.

```
Where:
- `:shard` is the shard feed derived using BFE encoded `groupKey`
    <details>
      <summary>details</summary>
      <div>

>         We cannot use the `groupId`, as this is publicly known, which would give attackers a way to test if people are in the group (breaking Principle 1.)

Author: I had some realisations about the "uniqueName" string thing used to determine a shared:
1. it cannot be the groupId - this is public already, and would allow people to sniff out group members (somewhat)
2. it cannot be just any string - unless a particular app just runs in a global singleton group .... which I cannot think of any usecase for, it would essentially be public to anyone with the app...

So it has to be private to people in the group, and it has to be unique... that leaves us with the groupKey?

I'm noticing we're doing "crypto uniqueness" things here, and that Kek's brain would be **invaluable** for checking these assumptions. I can spot _some_  problems but I would consider myself a beginner and we should seek professional advice. (i.e. a security auditor)

Reviewer: Yes, agreed. And I'm grateful you were able to spot this groupId versus groupKey dilemma, it's important, and wasn't obvious to me. There are details here that we didn't foresee.

Reviewer 2: What if this was a random 32 bit value created when you start the group. Then all invited would know this and we can use it for sympathy replication by revealing it to those that would like to help triplicate the group without knowing it's content

Author: you're proposing adding a new thing to a `group/add-member` message?

Problem - what if you add 4 people at once?
Solution - not a random 32bits, instead  `hash(groupAddMsgId, userId)`

        <br />
        We choose the the `groupKey` because it is a value known only to those already in the group.
      </div>
    </details>
- `:groupKey` is a content feed where
    - `feedpurpose = groupKey` where `groupKey` is the ssb-uri encoded groupKey for the group
    - `feedtype = ?` :warning:
    - the announcement of the this sub-feed MUST be encrypted with this group's `groupKey`
      <details>
        <summary>details</summary>
        <div>
          We need a `feedpurpose` which is unique to the group, which the `groupKey` is.
          We cannot use the `groupId`, because this is derived using the group init message, which does not exist until our feed exists.
          We encrypt this announce message so as not to leak the groupKey AND to protect group membership.
          <br />
          For sympathetic replication we will therefor need a distinct type of announce message (TODO)
        </div>
      </details>

## Flows

### 1. Creating a group

Staltz starts up his application.

> We assume he has already created his `group-invite` feed (following the spec above).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We assume he has already created his `invitations` feed (following the spec above).
```

In his application he creates a new "helsinki" group, which means he:

> 1. creates a new symmetric `groupKey`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Creates a new symmetric `groupKey`
```

> 2. create a content feed under a new shard (using the `groupKey` following the spec above)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Creates a content feed under a new shard (using the `groupKey` following the spec above)
```

> 3. publishes an encrypted `group/init` message to that new "helsinki" feed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Publishes a box2-encrypted `group/init` message on that new "helsinki" content feed
```

> 4. publishes an encrypted `group/add-member` message to his "group-invite" feed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Publishes a box2-encrypted `group/add-member` message on his "invitations" feed
```

      <details>
        <summary>details</summary>
        <div>
          This helps new members quickly see he is a member of the group, and also ensures he has a copy of the groupKey persisted in his records (encrypted to him and the group)
        </div>
      </details>

```mermaid
graph TB

root(root)
v1(v1)
4(4)
d(d)

> group-invite(group-invite):::groupInvite

Reviewer: ```suggestion
invitations(invitations):::invitationsClass
```

helsinki(helsinki):::group

subgraph Staltz
  root --> v1 --> 4 --> helsinki

>            v1 --> d --> group-invite

Reviewer: ```suggestion
           v1 --> d --> invitations
```

end

classDef default stroke:none;

> classDef groupInvite fill: #BF2669, stroke:none, color:white;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
classDef invitationsClass fill: #BF2669, stroke:none, color:white;
```

classDef group fill: #702A8C, stroke: none, color:white;
```
_Diagram showing Staltz feed state from his perspective_

### 2. Group creator invites someone

> Staltz wants to invite his friend Arj to the group he set up, so he publishes a `group/add-member` message (which conatins the `groupKey`) to his "group-invite" feed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Staltz wants to invite his friend Arj to the group he set up, so he publishes a `group/add-member` message (which contains the `groupKey`) on his "invitations" feed.
```

> When Arj next stats up his application and replicates Staltz's feed (they are friends) he discovers the new `group/add-member` for him Staltz's "group-invite" feed (peers MUST replicate friends group-invite feeds).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When Arj next starts up his application and replicates Staltz's feed tree (they are friends), he discovers the new `group/add-member` for him on Staltz's "invitations" feed (because peers must replicate their friends' "invitations" feeds).
```

```mermaid
graph TB

rootA(root)
v1A(v1)
4A(4):::unreplicated
dA(d)

> group-inviteA(group-invite):::groupInvite

Reviewer: ```suggestion
invitationsA(invitations):::invitationsClass
```

helsinkiA(helsinki):::unreplicated

rootB(root)
v1B(v1)
9B(9)

> group-inviteB(group-invite):::groupInvite

Reviewer: ```suggestion
invitationsB(invitations):::invitationsClass
```

subgraph Staltz
  rootA --> v1A --> 4A --> helsinkiA

>             v1A --> dA --> group-inviteA

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            v1A --> dA --> invitationsA
```

end

subgraph Arj

>   rootB --> v1B --> 9B --> group-inviteB

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  rootB --> v1B --> 9B --> invitationsB
```

end

classDef default stroke:none;

> classDef groupInvite fill: #BF2669, stroke:none, color:white;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
classDef invitationsClass fill: #BF2669, stroke:none, color:white;
```

classDef group fill: #702A8C, stroke: none, color:white;
classDef unreplicated opacity: 0.4, stroke: none;
```

> _Diagram showing feed state of Arj and Staltz from Arj's perspective. The greyed out feeds show feeds that exist for Staltz but which Arj has yet to want to replicate_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Diagram showing feed state of Arj and Staltz from Arj's perspective. The greyed out feeds show feeds that exist for Staltz but which Arj has yet to want to replicate._
```

> Assuming he accepts this invitation Arj then does the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assuming he accepts this invitation, Arj then does the following:
```

> 1. calculates the path to the "helsinki" group for staltz, and starts replicating it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Calculates the shard for the "helsinki" group for staltz, and starts replicating that shard feed and the "helsinki" feed
```

>     - in this example `@statlz/v1/4/helsinki` (where "helsinki" is derived from the `groupKey`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Let's ignore paths for now unless you want to update the `ssb-meta-feeds-spec` repo with "paths". :)

> 2. creates a helsinki feed for themself

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Creates a "helsinki" feed for himself
```

```mermaid
graph TB

rootA(root)
v1A(v1)
4A(4) & dA(d)

> group-inviteA(group-invite):::groupInvite

Reviewer: ```suggestion
invitationsA(invitations):::invitationsClass
```

helsinkiA(helsinki):::group

rootB(root)
v1B(v1)
9B(9) & cB(c)

> group-inviteB(group-invite):::groupInvite

Reviewer: ```suggestion
invitationsB(invitations):::invitationsClass
```

helsinkiB(helsinki):::group

subgraph Staltz
  rootA --> v1A --> 4A --> helsinkiA

>             v1A --> dA --> group-inviteA

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            v1A --> dA --> invitationsA
```

end

subgraph Arj

>   rootB --> v1B --> 9B --> group-inviteB

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  rootB --> v1B --> 9B --> invitationsB
```

            v1B --> cB --> helsinkiB
end

classDef default stroke:none;

> classDef groupInvite fill: #BF2669, stroke:none, color:white;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
classDef invitationsClass fill: #BF2669, stroke:none, color:white;
```

classDef group fill: #702A8C, stroke: none, color:white;
```

> _Diagram showing updated state for Arj after he joins the group. Note the shards each feed lands in are random (but deterministic if you know the `groupKey`)_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 _Diagram showing the updated state for Arj after he joins the group. Note the shards each feed lands in are different for each person (but deterministic if you know the `groupKey`)._
```

> Staltz can see that Arj has accepted the invitation because he is able to decrypt the feed-announce message for Arj's "helsinki" feed, and read that the purpose is the `groupKey`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Staltz can see that Arj has accepted the invitation because he is able to decrypt the feed announcement message for Arj's "helsinki" feed on the shard feed, and read that the `feedpurpose` is the `groupKey`. Staltz knows which shard feed to watch for the announcement, because Arj's shard feed is deterministically determined with information Staltz is aware of.
```

> (He also knows where to watch for such a feed to be announced because the shared is deterministiclly chosen.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### 3. Non-group creator invites someone

Arj now wants to invite Mix to the "helsinki" group. He follows the same pattern as in (2), but now as the inviter.

Mix knows Arj is a part of the group because he was invited by them.
Mix also knows staltz is part of the group because all `group/add-member` messages have
```
recps: [groupId, groupCreatorId, ...inviteeIds]
```
_As long as we know the creator we can always re-follow the chain of group-additions._

:fire: TODO - we need to write the group spec up with these changes clearly somewhere.

Staltz see Arj has invited Mix because he's replicating Arj's "group-invite" feed, so Statlz starts replicating Mix.

## Questions

> 1. if people in a group see that "mix was added" they are all going to start asking to replicate the feed "pathToMixsGroupFeed". On a network level this will cast a shadow revealing group members....

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

We discussed in Signal that the `pathToMixGroupFeed` is not transmitted over network, only the `feedIdToMixGroupFeed` and from the feed ID alone you cannot infer what its purpose is.

>     - possible soluton: raise sympathetic replication for obfuscation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 2. same problem as (1) exists when people join a group - they're going to start all asking for the same pattern of feeds (e.g. "can I have staltz/v1/d4/helsinki and arj/v1/c/helsinki"). It's like a fingerprint...

Author: OW BURN

Reviewer: Yeah this one is a big bummer. I think in fact sympathy replication might help us here, so it's not an entirely altruistic in purpose. Sympathy can work as obfuscation: are you replicating a box2 feed just to altruistically help out a friend (or even an "acquaintance", i.e. hop 2), or are you actually part of the same group? Sympathy might help us achieve plausible deniability.

Reviewer 2: This is where a lower shard number also helps us out. You might already have it. But also I'm general we should replicate maybe all the shards for hops1

---

Existing work to be ported in:
1. [2022-06-02 meeting](./2022-06-02-notes.md) - has good steps for how discovery works
2. [2022-07-06 meeting](./2022-07-06-notes.md)

<!-- References -->
[ssb-meta-feeds-spec]: https://github.com/ssbc/ssb-meta-feeds-spec

<!-- CSS -->
<style>
  .group-invite, .group {
    display: inline-block;
    width: 14px;
    height: 14px;
    border-radius: 2px;
  }
  .group-invite { background: #BF2669; }
  .group { background: #702A8C; }

  details > summary {
    color: grey;
    font-size: 12px
  }
  details > div {
    font-style: italic;
    background: #eee;

    padding: 14px 10px;
    border-left: 3px solid #999;
    margin-left: 10px;
  }

> </style>

Reviewer: This is very pretty in the hackmd, but could we go for simpler markdown that works in GitHub (or GitLab, or wherever else we transport this markdown).

Author: yeah good idea. I didn't realise this would not work in GH. I added this style cos it looked butt ugly without. 
Figured if this didn't work it would fall back to the ugly?
